content/houdini-docker-apple.md, before:

+++
title = "Houdini Docker Ubuntu Container on Apple Silicon"
template = "page.html"
date = 2023-07-27T10:52:00Z
[taxonomies]
tags = ["houdini", "docker", "MacOS", "hython"]
[extra]
summary = "Executing hython results in QEMU cpuinfo errors from USD lib"
+++

It's a great news that SideFX offers [Docker files](https://www.sidefx.com/download/daily-builds/?docker=true) for their Houdini software: especially when the Houdini Python API already provides a very promising [web server](https://www.sidefx.com/docs/houdini/hwebserver/index.html) module, which together mean powerful, novel, services can be thought of, given some "**ingenuity and web development skill**" -- a phrase I really like from this [Unreal Remote Control](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.2/en-US/remote-control-for-unreal-engine/) documentation.

So I decided to give the **Houdini Docker (Ubuntu)** a spin! In this blog I'm documenting some interesting things specific to running on Apple silicon that I encountered along the way while having tinkered with it over a weekend.

I'm assuming you have followed the necessary steps to edit the EULA date as outlined in the `README` in the downloaded zip from SideFX.

### 1. Prevent Docker Desktop on Apple Silicon from defaulting to Ubuntu for ARM architecture

I'm on Docker Desktop `v4.21` on a M1 MacBook, and all my Ubuntu images if specified simply with a version, e.g. `FROM ubuntu:18.04`, turn out to be Ubuntu for ARM architecture, -- seemingly because Docker _infers_ from the host --, which in this case is _not_ what we want. So we have to edit the `Dockerfile` downloaded to include the hash if we want Docker to pull the correct Ubuntu for `amd64` architecture:

```bash
FROM ubuntu:18.04@sha256:dca176c9663a7ba4c1f0e710986f5a25e672842963d95b960191e2d9f7185ebe
```

And fear not, this is just a very first hiccup we'll be experiencing! Anyhow, after the next step we'll be able to build a Docker image with intended architecture, like so:

![AMD64 Docker image](/attachments/houdini-docker-amd64.png)

### 2. Bypass Houdini auto-install failure in the Ubuntu image due to "SSE" prompt

Now if we run `docker-compose build`, the process will exit before it can complete the last layer where it's supposed to unzip the Houdini Linux build and run the `houdini.install` script, because it prompts for a Yes/No question about whether we want to proceed, saying "Your CPU does not appear to support SSE", but the script defaults to "No" for an answer.

Out of curiosity let's hijack this script to proceed none the less. We can tweak the last layers in the `Dockerfile` like so to default the answer to Yes.

### 3. Error on executing hython due to QEMU cpuinfo support

Commit message:

WIP: Step 3 of houdini-docker-apple.md

content/houdini-docker-apple.md, after:

+++
title = "Houdini Docker Ubuntu Container on Apple Silicon"
template = "page.html"
date = 2023-07-27T10:52:00Z
[taxonomies]
tags = ["houdini", "docker", "MacOS", "hython"]
[extra]
summary = "Executing hython results in QEMU cpuinfo errors from USD lib"
+++

It's a great news that SideFX offers [Docker files](https://www.sidefx.com/download/daily-builds/?docker=true) for their Houdini software: especially when the Houdini Python API already provides a very promising [web server](https://www.sidefx.com/docs/houdini/hwebserver/index.html) module, which together mean powerful, novel, services can be thought of, given some "**ingenuity and web development skill**" -- a phrase I really like from this [Unreal Remote Control](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.2/en-US/remote-control-for-unreal-engine/) documentation.

So I decided to give the **Houdini Docker (Ubuntu)** a spin! In this blog I'm documenting some interesting things specific to running on Apple silicon that I encountered along the way while having tinkered with it over a weekend.

I'm assuming you have followed the necessary steps to edit the EULA date as outlined in the `README` in the downloaded zip from SideFX.

### 1. Prevent Docker Desktop on Apple Silicon from defaulting to Ubuntu for ARM architecture

I'm on Docker Desktop `v4.21` on a M1 MacBook, and all my Ubuntu images if specified simply with a version, e.g. `FROM ubuntu:18.04`, turn out to be Ubuntu for ARM architecture, -- seemingly because Docker _infers_ from the host --, which in this case is _not_ what we want. So we have to edit the `Dockerfile` downloaded to include the hash if we want Docker to pull the correct Ubuntu for `amd64` architecture:

```bash
FROM ubuntu:18.04@sha256:dca176c9663a7ba4c1f0e710986f5a25e672842963d95b960191e2d9f7185ebe
```

And fear not, this is just a very first hiccup we'll be experiencing! Anyhow, after the next step we'll be able to build a Docker image with intended architecture, like so:

![AMD64 Docker image](/attachments/houdini-docker-amd64.png)

### 2. Bypass Houdini auto-install failure in the Ubuntu image due to "SSE" prompt

Now if we run `docker-compose build`, the process will exit before it can complete the last layer where it's supposed to unzip the Houdini Linux build and run the `houdini.install` script, because it prompts for a Yes/No question about whether we want to proceed, saying "Your CPU does not appear to support SSE", but the script defaults to "No" for an answer.

Out of curiosity let's hijack this script to proceed none the less. We can tweak the last layers in the `Dockerfile` like so to default the answer to Yes:

TODO: show last layer edits using sed

After the small hack, our Houdini image will be successfully built, meaning we have installed Houdini on a Ubuntu AMD64 image on a MacBook, and theoretically can run it non-graphically to process any Houdini computations -- including serving our next peculiar idea of some web service unique to Houdini capabilities (e.g. geometry processing, Vellum, KineFX, Solaris, anyone?), how cool is that?

### 3. Error on executing hython due to QEMU cpuinfo support

Following the next instructions in the `README`, from this single Houdini image we can spawn two containers: one serving the license, and the other running hython.

- The first container of sesinetd runs with no problem:

TODO: show command and image

- What unfortunately won't be working (on Apple silicon, that is) is with the second container where we want to execute hython: an obscure message from the USD lib complaining about missing information in the /proc/cpuinfo:

TODO: show error message

To admit, at this point I got rather frustrated, not knowing where I should file an issue: to Docker? or to SideFX? or to Pixar?

After doing some searching, I believe this belongs to [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/) supports for machine emulators, and the issue is with our Ubuntu AMD64 environment being emulated on Apple chip.
